Add option 5 to experiments doc (#262)
aws/aws-cdk-rfcs: text/0249-v2-experiments.md

  mitigate this downside by keeping the old unstable package around, but that
  leads to duplicated classes.

### Option 5: superset/subset releases

Instead of *splitting* the stable and experimental APIs into two different
packages, we release two builds of the same source code, where the *experimental*
build is a superset of the *stable* build.

This can be done automatically, by using jsii to strip out experimental APIs
from the **public interface** of the stable release. The implementation
(`.js` files) will be the same in both releases, so stable APIs in
`aws-cdk-lib` can safely use experimental APIs internally (though not in
their public API surfaces).

**How does stripping APIs from the public work?**

| TypeScript            | JavaScript | Java, Python, C#, Go            |
|-----------------------|------------|---------------------------------|

> | Stripped from `.d.ts` | N/A        | No bindings generated by `jsii` |

Reviewer: Minor: I feel like this table should be organized that each language is a row, not a column... kind of difficult to read right now.

In TypeScript, the compiler will prevent usage of APIs that are not advertised

> in the `.d.ts` files. Users will be able to cast this away using `as any` though.

Reviewer: > Users will be able to cast this away using `as any` though.

That's true also of `private` properties and methods in TypeScript, right?

Reviewer 2: Non issue

They will also be able to confuse the compiler enough that they will get to pass

> struct properties that are technically `@experimental`.

Reviewer: Sorry, I don't understand this sentence... can you show a quick code example inline here that illustrates what you mean?

> For JavaScript, an IDE will (hopefully) not autocomplete APIs missing from

Reviewer: Why the "hopefully" here? Are you saying there's a chance the IDE _can_ autocomplete APIs missing from the `.d.ts` files? If so, how can we solve that?

If we're certain it can't happen, I would remove the "hopefully", it muddles the message here quite a bit.

Author: An IDE can use other mechanisms than reading the `.d.ts` files. It can parse the JavaScript code, it can do dynamic evaluations of the code and inspect the objects at runtime.

I don't know which ones use what mechanism.

the `.d.ts` files, but otherwise nothing prevents users from calling the

> APIs, or passing struct properties that are technically experimental. On the

Reviewer: > passing struct properties that are technically experimental

Again, I feel like it's very similar to the above sentence, and I still don't understand what this means.

other hand, JavaScript devs are by definition required to read the docs,
so they can't miss the *experimental* banners displayed there.

For jsii client languages, the bindings for experimental APIs will simply not
exist so there's no way to work around that (though we'll have to check

> whether for example Python makes it possible to pass struct values that

Reviewer: > though we'll have to check whether for example Python makes it possible to pass struct values that aren't in the declared API surface

You lost me here again... can you expand on this point?

> aren't in the declared API surface).

Reviewer 2: Of course it will allow, but that's akin to javascript.

**Vending**

There are a number of different ways we can choose to distinguish the two builds.
See Appendix D for an evaluation of all the possibilities.

- Distinguish by package name
  - Can't be used in **pip**: there's no way to have an app that uses the experimental
    library work with a library that uses the stable library (no way to prevent the

>     transitive dependency package with a different name from being installed).

Reviewer: I don't understand exactly why that is... I thought that if a JSII-enabled JS/TS library had a peer dependency on `aws-cdk-lib`, then its `pip` version would **not** have a dependency on the Python version of `aws-cdk-lib`, because the customer of the app is supposed to bring in a dependency on the Python version of `aws-cdk-lib`, in whatever version they want? Is my understanding incorrect, and a peer-only dependency in JavaScript gets translated in Python to a regular dependency?

Or is the problem here a Python-only construct library?

Author: To my understanding, we have `peerDependencies` only because NPM allows multiple copies, which we don't want. A `peerDependency` still allows to model a dependency with an explicit version number though.

In other package managers, we don't have the problem of multiple copies so we don't need the solution of `peerDependencies`. In fact it doesn't exist, and the only way to achieve the same effect in `pip` would be NOT declare a dependency at all. Then you still require the consumer to bring the dependency (good but unnecessary), but the package cannot declare what version it needs (bad).

-------------

All this is a long way to say: `peerDependencies` in npm will be translated into *regular* dependencies in other package managers.

Reviewer: Does this imply that the solution you gave in the Maven part (`provided` scope) is not viable then?

> - Distinguish by prerelease tag

Reviewer 2: What about "snapshot" versions in maven? Aren't those similar to pre-release in npm?

  - Can't be used in **Maven**: an app can't depend on stable versions only

>     (a range of `[1.60.0,2.0.0)` would also match `1.61.0-experimental`).

Reviewer: 1. By "app", do you mean "library" here? I think it's important to be precise in this RFC, this is complicated as-is 😃.
2. Not sure if that's very important. We can always make the Java packages depend on a fixed version. In Maven, the closest dependency to the root always wins, so depending on a fixed version shouldn't be an issue.

Author: No, I specifically mean app.

Reviewer: I guess this is the same discussion as https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/pull/262#discussion_r509589600

- Distinguish by major version
  - All package managers have a way to bring in a different version of a package,
    although many of them will complain that declared dependencies aren't satisified.

Distinguishing by major version is the only possibility that works across all

> package managers.

Reviewer: If the conclusion here is "we have to do it by major version", then I would state that here, and move the explanation of why that is into the appendix itself.

Author: I think a short explainer with a pointer to the appendix for more details reads better. It's not like it takes up giant swathes of space.

Something like:

| Scheme   | Stable   | Experimental            |
|----------|----------|-------------------------|
| Even/odd | `2.60.1` | `3.60.1`                |
| +100     | `2.60.1` | `102.60.1`              |

> | <1       | `2.60.1` | `0.2.60-experimental.1` |

Reviewer: Do we really need both `0.x` _and_ `experimental` in the version? I think just `0.x` should make that pretty clear?

Author: I guess, but those `0.x` versions already exist and we have to not conflict with them.

In any case, this is water under the bridge.

**Summary**

Advantages:

> 1. Stable code can depend on unstable code.

Reviewer: Can we use the same wording as in the other options?

```suggestion
1. It's possible for stable modules to depend on unstable ones
  (see Appendix B for data on how necessary that is for the CDK currently).
```

2. Stabilizing code will not be a breaking change for customers.
3. Stabilizing code will be a simple operation for CDK developers.

> 4. No additional management overhead of multiple packages/repos/etc.

Reviewer: We're not interested in the repos argument here really. So I would just leave it as "No additional management overhead from splitting the code into multiple packages".

> 

Reviewer: I believe you missed an advantage, which is "It's possible for unstable modules to depend on other unstable modules".

Disadvantages:

> 1. Protection not offered for JavaScript users, can be bypassed in TypeScript.

Reviewer: How important is this? Aren't TypeScript users one `as any` away from breaking all compile-time guarantees like `private` today?

Reviewer 2: I think we can omit

Author: It's fine that we don't think it's an option with a heavy weight, but I'd still want to keep it in for completeness.

It's definitely a distinction with the partitioned packages variant. 

I will move it further down though.

> 2. Stable/experimental versioning scheme is not based on any well-known industry

Reviewer 2: still feel like there should be an idiomatic way in any package manager to publish a pre-release and it feels like that's the correct mental model for the experimental flavor

   standard, we're going to have to clearly explain it to people.

> 

Reviewer: I would add "Requires JSII changes" to the list of downsides.

    library work with a library that uses the stable library (no way to prevent the
    transitive dependency package with a different name from being installed).
- Distinguish by prerelease tag

>   - Most logical

Reviewer: What's this line...? Did you forget to finish a sentence perhaps? 🙂

Author: It's just the 'most logical' :)

  leads to duplicated classes between the 2 versions.

**Verdict**: discarded as a worse version of option #5.

# Appendix D - Alternatives for identifying stable/experimental builds

We have the following options to pick from:

- Different package names (`aws-cdk-lib` vs `aws-cdk-lib-experimental`).
- Pre-release version tag
- Different major versions

We need to evaluate all of these, for each package manager, on the following criteria:

> - Can applications depend on an upwards unbounded range of *stable* builds? (important)

Reviewer: "applications" - do you mean "libraries" here?

Author: I do not. We want application builders to migrate along with us to new CDK versions quickly. That is, I would want app builders to depend on ranges, not on point versions.

Reviewer: Interesting. I feel like I have the *exact* opposite approach (you should only ever depend on pinned versions, and any upgrades should be done through a commit that you can revert if anything goes wrong),...

I feel like most tools agree it's better to pin versions, with how popular lock files have become. So maybe this is not an important point for apps? (I agree it's important for libs though)

name, we wouldn't be able to use a library that uses stable code (it would
contain `require('aws-cdk-lib')`) in an application that uses experimental
code (the `package.json` would contain: `{ dependencies: {
"aws-cdk-lib-experiments": "..." }}`).

NPM 6.9.0 (released May 2019) introduces a feature that helps with this:
[package
aliases](https://github.com/npm/rfcs/blob/latest/implemented/0001-package-aliases.md)
which allows installing a package under a different name, so we could install
`aws-cdk-lib-experimental` under the name `aws-cdk-lib`, and no `require()` statements
would have to be changed.

An application trying to use experimental will do this:

```json
{
  "dependencies": {
      "aws-cdk-lib": "npm:aws-cdk-lib-experiments@1.60.0",
      "some-construct-lib-that-uses-stable": "^1.2.3"
  }
}
```

An experimental library would declare this:

```json
{
  "peerDependencies": {
      "aws-cdk-lib": "1.60.0"
      // Note: ideally you'd like to express "aws-cdk-lib-experiments": "1.60.0" here, but
      // if you do that "npm ls" will complain about an unmet peer dependency
  },
  "devDependencies": {
      "aws-cdk-lib": "npm:aws-cdk-lib-experiments@1.60.0"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Sorry, I don't understand the problem here. If a library peer depends on `aws-cdk-lib-experiments`, then the application _should_ declare a dependency on `aws-cdk-lib-experiments`, and NPM complaining about missing peer dependency if the application only depends on `aws-cdk-lib` is a _good_ thing I'm pretty sure?

What am I missing?

Author: I see I left something out that was (to me) so obvious that I didn't think it would need writing down. Failure of judgement :).

This will all work as intended and put code in the right places,
but we lose the tool-checked dependency on experimental; from NPM's
point of view the library depends on stable CDK, and it's only
notes in the README that can inform the consumer otherwise.

**Maven**

No need to change the sources when using a stable library with an
experimental app, as the namespaces and class names will be the same.

Using a stable library in an experimental app can be done in two ways:

* The library uses the `provided` dependency flavor (similar to `peerDependencies` in NPM).

>   Requires the app to bring the right version of CDK.

Reviewer: `provided` seems like slam-dunk here.

* The app that wants to use the *experimental* build uses dependency exclusions
  to remove the dependency on the *stable* build (looks like this is necessary for
  every stable library individually)

https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-optional-and-excludes-dependencies.html#

**pip**

No need to change the sources when using a stable library with an
experimental app, as the namespaces and class names will be the same.

`pip` transitively fetches from the library's `setup.py`, and there's no way
to override that.

Our only option around that is to have stable libraries not declare any CDK
dependency in `setup.py`, but then we also lose the ability for libraries to

> specify their dependency version, which is not really acceptable.

Reviewer: Is it really such a big deal? I feel like declaring the CDK dependency version is just meant to provide a different error message when you violate it? So is it really such a big deal that it would fail at runtime?

- `aws-cdk-lib@1.60.100-experimental`
- `aws-cdk-lib@1.61.0-experimental`

But that is most likely just going to break people's heads so let's not even try.

| .     | Stable apps | Experimental app uses Stable lib | Without complaints | Lib advertises Experimental |
|-------|-------------|----------------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------------|
| NPM   | yes         | yes                              | no                 | no                          |
| Maven | no          | with excluded dependencies       | yes                | yes                         |
| pip   | yes         | yes                              | no                 | yes                         |
| NuGet | ?           | ?                                | ?                  | ?                           |
| Go    | ?           | ?                                | ?                  | ?                           |

**NPM**

Stable ranges: yes, `^1.60.0` does not include `1.61.1-experimental`.

Experimental app uses stable lib: can be done, the lib only uses a peerDependency. `npm ls` will complain about
a missing peerDependency though.

**Maven**

> Stable ranges: no, `[1.60.0,)` *will* include `1.61.1-experimental`.

Reviewer: Again, I would question whether using a range for Maven is really interesting here.

(Also, is this for the library? Or app? It's really important to be precise here).

> Experimental app uses stable lib:

Reviewer: Simple - works fine if we use `provided` in the library.

**pip**

Stable ranges: yes, `>=1.60.0` will not match version `1.60.1-experimental` [ref](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/pip_install/#pre-release-versions)

Experimental app uses stable lib: `pip` allows overriding transitive dependencies using `requirements.txt`, but it will complain
while doing so:

Example (I tried with different packages):

```text
awscli 1.18.158 has requirement s3transfer<0.4.0,>=0.3.0, but you'll have s3transfer 0.2.0 which is incompatible.
```

**NuGet**

...pending responses from .NET SDK team...

## Different major versions

We would vend the experimental build under a prerelease tag, for example:

- `aws-cdk-lib@2.60.0`
- `aws-cdk-lib@3.60.0` (odd ranges are experimental)

Or:

- `aws-cdk-lib@2.60.0`
- `aws-cdk-lib@102.60.0` (100+ versions are experimental)

> | .     | Stable apps | Experimental app uses Stable lib | Without complaints | Lib advertises Experimental |

Reviewer: I gotta say, the "Without complaints" category is hard, because you have to remember it's only for the  "experimental app with stable lib" scenario. Maybe call it "...without complaints", to make it more obvious?

|-------|-------------|----------------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------------|
| NPM   | yes         | yes                              | yes                | no                          |
| Maven | yes         | with excluded dependencies       | yes                | yes                         |
| pip   | yes         | yes                              | no                 | yes                         |
| NuGet | ?           | ?                                | ?                  | ?                           |
| Go    | ?           | ?                                | ?                  | ?                           |

**NPM**

Mostly like pre-release tags, except libraries using stable can explicitly declare they're usable
with both stable and experimental ranges by using multiple `peerDependency` ranges:

```json
{
  "peerDependencies": {
    "aws-cdk-lib": "^2.60.0,^102.60.0"
  }
}
```

This would suppress the warning you would otherwise get for a non-compatible version.

**Maven**

Like pre-release tags, except we don't get the mixing in of pre-release versions with
regular versions.

**pip**

Like pre-release tags.

**NuGet**

> ...pending responses from .NET SDK team...

Reviewer 3: AFAIK, .NET does not support supplying multiple version constraints... All my attempts so far resulted in constraints being entirely ignored, resulting in .NET resolving to the lowest existing version (not the desired behavior).
